Release Notes 1.8.0 (#266)
percona/everest-doc: docs/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.8.0-(2025-06-29).md

    | **4.**|[Bugs](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.7.0-%282025-05-29%29.html#bug-fixes)|Find out about all the bugs fixed in Percona Everest 1.8.0|
    | **5.**|[Known limitations](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.7.0-%282025-05-29%29.html#known-limitation)|Discover all the known limitations in Percona Everest 1.8.0|

## 🌟 Release highlight

### Import external backups into Percona Everest clusters

!!! warning
    The **external backup import** feature in Percona Everest is currently in **Technical Preview**. Early adopters are advised to use this feature only for testing purposes and **not in production environments**.

Starting with Percona Everest 1.8.0, we are excited to roll out a new feature that allows you to directly import database backups from external object storage into clusters managed by Percona Everest. This feature leverages an extensible framework that simplifies your backup process.

#### Key features

- Import database backups from external storage, such as Amazon S3, directly into database clusters managed by Percona Everest.

> - Support various backup formats and tools, including logical and physical backups created using `pg_dump`,` mysqldump`, `mongodump`, and others.

Author: Fixed

Here are the steps to import the external backups:
{.power-number}

1. Navigate to the Percona Everest homepage and click **Import**.
    
2. Select the database type you want to import(MySQL, PostgreSQL, or MongoDB). The **Basic information** page will be displayed.

3. Fill in the details on the **Basic information** page and click **Continue**. This will take you to the **Import information** page.

4. On the **Import Information** page, enter the following:

    - Choose the data importer from the dropdown.

    - Provide S3 details.

        ![!image](../images/mongodb_s3_details_importers.png)

    -  Specify the **File Directory** path within your S3 bucket where the backup files are stored. Click **Save**.

        Refer to the [documentation](https://docs.percona.com/everest/backups_and_restore/how_to_import_backups.html) for details on the correct file path format.

        ![!image](../images/importers_mongo_file_path.png)

    -  Enter the key-value pairs and user secrets (For MongoDB and MySQL) in the **DB credentials** section.

        ![!image](../images/importers_mongodb_db_credentials.png)

> 5. Click **Continue** until you reach the end of the wizard. You will be notified once the import is successfully completed.

Author: Fixed.

## New features

> - [EVEREST-2068](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2068), [EVEREST-2069](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2069), [EVEREST-2070](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2070): Starting with Percona Everest 1.8.0, you can now import external backups from PostgreSQL, MySQL, and MongoDB, respectively, into clusters managed by Percona Everest using a simplified and extensible DataImporter framework.

Reviewer: Please feel free to improve this suggestion .. My point is that we should mention clearly that the default data importers work for the Percona operators only, but the underlying framework allows you to customize your import process ...

```suggestion
- [EVEREST-2068](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2068), [EVEREST-2069](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2069), [EVEREST-2070](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2070): Starting with Percona Everest 1.8.0, you can now import external backups taken using the Percona PostgreSQL, MySQL, and MongoDB operators into clusters managed by Percona Everest. Additionally, the newly added Data Importers framework allows you to customize your import process using backup/restore tools of your choice.
```

## Improvements

- [EVEREST-1806](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1806): We have improved the visibility of the proxy validation message when creating a MySQL database.

- [EVEREST-1909](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1909): Duplicate IP/Netmask entries for external access are now prevented, ensuring accurate network configurations in database clusters.

> - [EVEREST-1946](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1946): When editing a database cluster, users might mistakenly enter an incorrect disk size. Since disk downscaling is not supported and resizing triggers a 6-hour lockout (e.g., for MongoDB on EKS), Percona Everest now prompts for confirmation before applying disk size changes.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that this has anything to do with incorrect disk sizes, it mostly to warn users that this operation isn't reversible. I would also refrain from mentioning the 6-hour thing.

```suggestion
- [EVEREST-1946](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1946): Since disk resizing is an irreversible operation, Percona Everest now prompts for confirmation before applying disk size changes.
```

- [EVEREST-1895](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1895): Resolved an issue where the Point-in-Time Recovery (PITR) time could not be adjusted from the last successful backup. Users can now modify the PITR time as intended.

- [EVEREST-1948](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1948): The component **Age** was previously displayed incorrectly on the **Components** tab. It now reflects the accurate age of each component.

- [EVEREST-2001](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2001): Addressed an issue where the Disk, CPU, and Memory input fields became unresponsive or difficult to edit when large values were entered. Input behavior is now consistent and reliable across all value ranges.

- [EVEREST-2030](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2030): Fixed an issue where users were not logged out after account deletion. The UI remained active even though the API token had been invalidated. The session is now properly terminated upon deletion.

- [EVEREST-2037](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2037): Fixed an issue where the `Policy is being used` message appeared even when the policy was not linked to any database.

> - [EVEREST-2043](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2043): While running everestctl, setting `pmm.enabled=true` caused PMM to be deployed in the default namespace instead of the everest-system namespace. PMM is now correctly deployed in the everest-system namespace, ensuring consistency with helm install.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [EVEREST-2043](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-2043): While running `everestctl install`, setting `pmm.enabled=true` caused PMM to be deployed in the default namespace instead of the everest-system namespace. PMM is now correctly deployed in the everest-system namespace, ensuring consistency with helm install.
```
